packages/sutra-core/README.md, before:

# Sutra Core - Graph-Based Reasoning Engine

The foundational package for the Sutra AI system, providing graph-based reasoning with explainable AI capabilities.

## Features

- **Concept Management**: Adaptive strength learning for knowledge concepts
- **Association Networks**: Typed relationships between concepts (semantic, causal, temporal, hierarchical, compositional)  
- **Adaptive Learning**: Research-based adaptive focus learning (AdaKD-inspired)
- **Real-Time Integration**: Instant knowledge updates without retraining

## Installation

```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Concepts

```python
from sutra_core import Concept, Association, AssociationType

# Create a concept
concept = Concept(
    id="photosynthesis", 
    content="process by which plants convert light energy to chemical energy"
)

# Access strengthens the concept
concept.access()
print(f"Concept strength: {concept.strength}")
```

### Adaptive Learning

```python
from sutra_core.learning import AdaptiveLearner, AssociationExtractor
from collections import defaultdict

# Set up learning system
concepts = {}
associations = {}
word_to_concepts = defaultdict(set)
concept_neighbors = defaultdict(set)

extractor = AssociationExtractor(
    concepts, word_to_concepts, concept_neighbors, associations
)
learner = AdaptiveLearner(concepts, extractor)

# Learn new knowledge with adaptive focus
concept_id = learner.learn_adaptive(
    "Photosynthesis converts sunlight into glucose and oxygen",
    source="biology_textbook"
)
```

### Text Processing

```python
from sutra_core.utils import extract_words, get_association_patterns

# Extract meaningful words
words = extract_words("Photosynthesis is a crucial biological process")
print(words)  # ['photosynthesis', 'crucial', 'biological', 'process']

# Get association patterns
patterns = get_association_patterns()
for pattern, assoc_type in patterns:
    print(f"{assoc_type}: {pattern}")
```

## Architecture

### Core Components

- **`graph/`**: Core data structures (Concept, Association, ReasoningPath)
- **`learning/`**: Adaptive learning algorithms and association extraction
- **`utils/`**: Text processing and utility functions

### Key Classes

#### Concept
Represents a knowledge unit with adaptive strength learning:
- Strength increases with access (max 10.0)
- Tracks usage statistics and metadata
- Serializable for persistence

#### Association  
Weighted connections between concepts:
- Multiple types: semantic, causal, temporal, hierarchical, compositional
- Confidence scoring for uncertainty handling
- Strengthens through use

#### AdaptiveLearner
Implements research-based adaptive focus:
- Difficult concepts (strength < 4.0): Strong reinforcement (1.15×)
- Easy concepts (strength > 7.0): Minimal reinforcement (1.01×)
- Dynamic extraction depth based on difficulty

## Research Foundation

Based on cutting-edge research:

- **Adaptive Focus Learning**: "LLM-Oriented Token-Adaptive Knowledge Distillation" (Oct 2025)
- **Loss-Driven Token Focusing**: More compute for difficult concepts
- **Dynamic Reinforcement**: Strength-based learning strategies

## Development

```bash
# Run tests
python -m pytest tests/

# Format code  
black sutra_core/
isort sutra_core/

# Type checking
mypy sutra_core/
```

## Performance

- **Memory**: ~0.1KB per concept
- **Learning**: ~1000 concepts/second
- **Access**: O(1) concept lookup via word indexing
- **Associations**: O(branches^depth) graph traversal

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Major improvements: core logic fixes, maintenance APIs, and comprehensive documentation updates
Core improvements:
- Fix association strengthening to affect reasoning (confidence boost + last_used tracking)
- Fix neighbor index symmetry post-load (enables bidirectional search)
- Add maintenance APIs: get_health_snapshot(), decay_and_prune()
- Improve query processing: clamp confidence [0,1], context threshold >=0.6
- Centralize path selection and add co-occurrence extraction cap
- Strengthen concept IDs from 12 to 16 hex chars

Tooling and quality:
- Add .flake8 config aligned with Black (88 chars, ignore E203/W503)
- Split lint commands: make lint (core) vs make lint-all (repo-wide)
- Reduce per-query logging verbosity to DEBUG level

Documentation:
- Update WARP.md, API_REFERENCE.md, README.md with new features
- Add CHANGELOG.md for October 2025 changes
- Refresh quickstart and setup guides with maintenance examples
- Update package docs and development guides

Tests: All 60 core tests passing after changes

packages/sutra-core/README.md, after:

# Sutra Core - Graph-Based Reasoning Engine

The foundational package for the Sutra AI system, providing graph-based reasoning with explainable AI capabilities.

## Features

- **Concept Management**: Adaptive strength learning for knowledge concepts
- **Association Networks**: Typed relationships between concepts (semantic, causal, temporal, hierarchical, compositional)  
- **Adaptive Learning**: Research-based adaptive focus learning (AdaKD-inspired)
- **Real-Time Integration**: Instant knowledge updates without retraining

## Installation

```bash
pip install -e .
```

## Quick Start

### Basic Concepts

```python
from sutra_core import Concept, Association, AssociationType

# Create a concept
concept = Concept(
    id="photosynthesis", 
    content="process by which plants convert light energy to chemical energy"
)

# Access strengthens the concept
concept.access()
print(f"Concept strength: {concept.strength}")
```

### Adaptive Learning

```python
from sutra_core.learning import AdaptiveLearner, AssociationExtractor
from collections import defaultdict

# Set up learning system
concepts = {}
associations = {}
word_to_concepts = defaultdict(set)
concept_neighbors = defaultdict(set)

extractor = AssociationExtractor(
    concepts, word_to_concepts, concept_neighbors, associations
)
learner = AdaptiveLearner(concepts, extractor)

# Learn new knowledge with adaptive focus
concept_id = learner.learn_adaptive(
    "Photosynthesis converts sunlight into glucose and oxygen",
    source="biology_textbook"
)
```

### Text Processing

```python
from sutra_core.utils import extract_words, get_association_patterns

# Extract meaningful words
words = extract_words("Photosynthesis is a crucial biological process")
print(words)  # ['photosynthesis', 'crucial', 'biological', 'process']

# Get association patterns
patterns = get_association_patterns()
for pattern, assoc_type in patterns:
    print(f"{assoc_type}: {pattern}")
```

## Architecture

### Core Components

- **`graph/`**: Core data structures (Concept, Association, ReasoningPath)
- **`learning/`**: Adaptive learning algorithms and association extraction
- **`utils/`**: Text processing and utility functions

### Key Classes

#### Concept
Represents a knowledge unit with adaptive strength learning:
- Strength increases with access (max 10.0)
- Tracks usage statistics and metadata
- Serializable for persistence

#### Association  
Weighted connections between concepts:
- Multiple types: semantic, causal, temporal, hierarchical, compositional
- Confidence scoring for uncertainty handling
- Strengthens through use

#### AdaptiveLearner
Implements research-based adaptive focus:
- Difficult concepts (strength < 4.0): Strong reinforcement (1.15×)
- Easy concepts (strength > 7.0): Minimal reinforcement (1.01×)
- Dynamic extraction depth based on difficulty

## Research Foundation

Based on cutting-edge research:

- **Adaptive Focus Learning**: "LLM-Oriented Token-Adaptive Knowledge Distillation" (Oct 2025)
- **Loss-Driven Token Focusing**: More compute for difficult concepts
- **Dynamic Reinforcement**: Strength-based learning strategies

## Development

```bash
# Run tests
python -m pytest tests/

# Format code  
black sutra_core/
isort sutra_core/

# Type checking
mypy sutra_core/
```

## Performance

- **Memory**: ~0.1KB per concept
- **Learning**: ~1000 concepts/second
- **Access**: O(1) concept lookup via word indexing
- **Associations**: O(branches^depth) graph traversal

## Configuration (New)

- ReasoningEngine caching:
  - enable_caching (bool): enable query caching
  - max_cache_size (int): max cached queries
  - cache_ttl_seconds (float|None): optional TTL for cached entries (LRU+TTL)
- Learning links from central concept to extracted phrases:
  - enable_central_links (bool): default True
  - central_link_confidence (float): default 0.6
  - central_link_type (AssociationType): default COMPOSITIONAL

## Persistence Notes (Updated)

- Associations are serialized with ":" as the source/target separator. The loader accepts both ":" and "|" for backward compatibility.
- Index rebuild now uses the same tokenization as learning (utils.extract_words) to keep word-to-concepts consistent after load.

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.
