docs/GETTING_STARTED.md, before:

# Getting Started with Sutra Engine

This guide walks you through setting up Sutra Engine and making your first semantic search.
If you want the shortest path, use `docs/STANDALONE_QUICKSTART.md`.

---

## 🏗 Installation

Sutra Engine is built using Rust.

1. **Clone the repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/nranjan2code/sutra-engine.git
   cd sutra-engine
   ```

2. **Build the binary**:
   ```bash
   cargo build --release --bin storage-server
   ```

3. **Run the engine**:
   ```bash
   ./target/release/storage-server
   ```

By default, the engine will create a `./data` directory (as configured in your environment or defaults) to store its Persistent Knowledge Graph and HNSW indices.

---

## 💡 Core Concepts

### 1. Concepts
Every piece of information in Sutra is stored as a **Concept**. A concept has content (text), an optional vector embedding, and metadata.

### 2. Dual-Plane Memory
Sutra operates on two planes:
- **Vector Plane**: For fast, fuzzy semantic similarity.
- **Graph Plane**: For exact, explainable relationships (links between concepts).

---

## 🛠 Your First Operation

The engine uses a custom binary protocol. You can interact with it using any TCP client that supports MessagePack serialization.

### Basic Request Flow:
1. Open a TCP connection to `localhost:50051`.
2. Send a 4-byte big-endian length prefix.
3. Send the MessagePack-encoded request body.

See the [**API Reference**](API_REFERENCE.md) for the full list of available commands and response formats.


---

## 🛡 Enabling Security

For production, you **must** enable security mode.

1. **Generate a Secret**:
   ```bash
   export SUTRA_AUTH_SECRET="your-very-long-and-secure-secret-32-chars"
   ```
2. **Enable Secure Mode**:
   ```bash
   export SUTRA_SECURE_MODE=true
   ./start-engine.sh
   ```

Now, all clients must provide a valid HMAC signature to interact with the engine.

---

## 🚀 Next Steps
- Explore the [**API Reference**](API_REFERENCE.md) for advanced queries.
- Read the [**Operations Guide**](OPERATIONS.md) for scaling and backups.

Commit message:

feat: Sutra Engine A+ Upgrade (Local Inference, Dynamic Rules, NL Interface)
- Implemented 'Internal Brain': Local embedding inference via Candle/MiniLM (no external deps)
- Implemented 'Babelfish': Natural Language TCP interface ('Remember that...', 'Search for...')
- Implemented 'Dynamic Semantics': Hot-reloadable semantic rules via semantics.toml
- Updated documentation (README, API Ref, Architecture)
- Added storage-server dual-protocol support (Binary + Text sniffing)
- Added comprehensive test suite (test_storage.py)
- Fixed all compiler warnings and technical debt

docs/GETTING_STARTED.md, after:

# Getting Started with Sutra Engine

This guide walks you through setting up Sutra Engine and making your first semantic search.
If you want the shortest path, use `docs/STANDALONE_QUICKSTART.md`.

---

## 🏗 Installation

Sutra Engine is built using Rust.

1. **Clone the repository**:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/nranjan2code/sutra-engine.git
   cd sutra-engine
   ```

2. **Build the binary**:
   ```bash
   cargo build --release --bin storage-server
   ```

3. **Run the engine**:
   ```bash
   # Defaults to port 50051. Use 9000 for NL examples.
   STORAGE_PORT=9000 cargo run --release --bin storage-server
   ```

By default, the engine will create a `./data` directory (as configured in your environment or defaults) to store its Persistent Knowledge Graph and HNSW indices.

---

## 💡 Core Concepts

### 1. Concepts
Every piece of information in Sutra is stored as a **Concept**. A concept has content (text), an optional vector embedding, and metadata.

### 2. Dual-Plane Memory
Sutra operates on two planes:
- **Vector Plane**: For fast, fuzzy semantic similarity.
- **Graph Plane**: For exact, explainable relationships (links between concepts).

---

## 🛠 Your First Operation

### Option A: Natural Language (Simplest)
1. Ensure server is running on port 9000 (`STORAGE_PORT=9000`).
2. Use `netcat` to talk to it:
   ```bash
   echo "Remember that the sky is blue" | nc localhost 9000
   echo "Search for sky" | nc localhost 9000
   ```

### Option B: Binary Protocol (High Performance)
1. Open a TCP connection to `localhost:50051`.
2. Send a 4-byte big-endian length prefix.
3. Send the MessagePack-encoded request body.
4. Receive highly compact binary response.

See the [**API Reference**](API_REFERENCE.md) for full details.


---

## 🛡 Enabling Security

For production, you **must** enable security mode.

1. **Generate a Secret**:
   ```bash
   export SUTRA_AUTH_SECRET="your-very-long-and-secure-secret-32-chars"
   ```
2. **Enable Secure Mode**:
   ```bash
   export SUTRA_SECURE_MODE=true
   ./start-engine.sh
   ```

Now, all clients must provide a valid HMAC signature to interact with the engine.

---

## 🚀 Next Steps
- Explore the [**API Reference**](API_REFERENCE.md) for advanced queries.
- Read the [**Operations Guide**](OPERATIONS.md) for scaling and backups.
